the unexpurgated pike report foreword by
philip AG report of the House Select
Committee on Intelligence 1976 preface
in early March of 1991 at about the time
that the Kurds were being massacred in
northern Iraq after the Gulf War I saw
my first copy of the pike Commission
report a number of people were talking
about a symposium on free speech issues
Paul month a champaign-urbana activist
and host of a talk show on a local
public radio station W EFT had obtained
a copy of the report and was reading
aloud about the massacre of the Kurds
which had taken place in the 70s an
obviously timely bit of history he
seemed especially to relish repeating
the quote attributed to Henry Kissinger
that quote covert aid is not to be
confused with missionary work end quote
see page 138 of this document by
coincidence a few weeks later Daniel
Schorr the reporter who had leaked to
the pike report to the Village Voice
refused to reveal the source of the leak
to Congress at the risk of a contempt
citation and lost his job at CBS came to
speak at the University of Illinois as
part of another symposium on the
behavior of the press during the Gulf
War month and several friends were
distributing flyers noting Shore's role
in the release of the pike report and
the reports relevance to the just then
completed route of the Kurds in the Q&A
session I asked sure to comment on the
Pike report which I noted had never been
published in its entirety in the u.s.
various abridged volumes printed by
foreign publishers were scattered in
academic libraries sure noted that it
had virtually all been published in The
Voice though he agreed that this did not
leave it readily available to the public
he then said that it being 15 years
after the leak he would no longer object
to making available his own unabridged
version of the report to anyone who
wanted it by yet another coincidence I
had just agreed to teach what is
sometimes called
the monster section of political science
150 introduction to American government
one year hence 1200 students per
semester sign up for this course the
publisher who produced the textbook I
favored was willing to publish
additional material to accompany the
textbook at a nominal fee as an
inducement for me to adopt their text
they had in mind a personalized study
guide suddenly I had in mind the Pike
report with the help of Shor's assistant
at National Public Radio Amy Holman I
obtained a photocopy of the report over
the summer of 91 I retyped it my poor
progress by October of 91 meant I had to
seek typing help from Sheila Kovalchuk
sandy quill Minh Barbara CAI sweater
Octavia Florence and Beth reefs tech in
which I gratefully acknowledge a
colleague of mine dr. Joseph Miller
happened to own one of the foreign
copies of the pike report published by
the Bertrand Russell Peace Foundation of
London in addition to most of the Pike
report that Edition contained a lucid
introduction to the report by former CIA
agent and thence forth CIA critic Philip
Agee Agee sets the scene which leads to
the production of the report summarizes
its findings and most importantly
details the aftermath the suppression of
the report its suppression Shores firing
and the destruction of Otis Pike's
political career John Earl of
mcgraw-hill was kind enough to obtain
permission from the foundation after
convincing them that they had in fact
published such a book so many years
before for AG's introduction to be
reproduced here I thank them for that
and for their initial publication of the
report to my knowledge this is the first
publication of the complete and
unabridged Pike report except for
correction of some type of graphical
errors and doubtless insertion of others
the text is exactly as it appeared then
in a number of cases information is
missing from the draft
Pyke report touches on most of the
themes I cover in my course introducing
students to American government
separation of powers civil liberties the
roles of the media parties and interest
groups the operation of Congress and the
presidency the conduct of foreign and
domestic policy the role of information
in government and most importantly the
function of unelected intelligence
agencies in shaping events at home and
across the world I could assign any
number of books on such topics Phillip
AG's works prime among them and they
would all suffer from the same problem
of credibility my students don't know
Agee nor do I and our choice whether or
not to believe his reporting is largely
a matter of taste and faith here by
contrast we have a government document
the fruit of a congressional
investigation which was ultimately
suppressed by the House of
Representatives not because it was false
but because it was true it gave away
state secrets information about the
operation of government the students
beginning the study of government need
to know and being in the public domain
the price is right I hope students and
others find it intriguing and useful
even 16 years after non publication it
is still all too timely Gregory Andrade
diamond Urbana Illinois October 1991
[Music]
this is our hidden history
you